# Printing Escaped String in Swift
An interesting tip I realized trying to debug and test API JSON responses from a server.  It's common for me to want to use the actual string responses from the servers as templates for my Unit Tests.  But inserting JSON responses directly into Xcode is problematic, mostly because there's a ton of double quotes that need escaping.  In the past, I've used everything from curl to Postman grab the server responses, manually escape what needs escaping, and then paste the responses back into Xcode. That's a pain for a lot of reasons.  For one, curl and Postman doesn't handle authentication flows very well.  You can set them up, but you generally have to manually copy authentication tokens into API url headers.  Second, manually escaping the strings, even if you're using a script/Vim/search&replace, is still kind of a pain.  

Your project probably already has authentication built in and accessible to your unit tests.  Automating that in your tests should be fairly straight forward, at least is for me.  So the problem of manually handling authentication tokens is already taken care of.  The next issue is actually grabbing the response.  The problem I ran into was printing the response still required that I escape the string manually before pasting it back into the unit tests.  However, if you're using Swift, I accidentally discovered that printing an `Optional` string will print the value already escaped as `Optional("escaped string")`.  From there it's easy to copy the escaped string and paste it into your tests.

Of course, the best solution for large projects with a lot of separate API calls is to put the responses into separate files, place them in the project under the unit tests target(s), and load them into Xcode unit tests during runtime.  This requires a lot of initial setup, but then you can update the files in a script, assuming you can handle the authentication flow in there.  But for smaller projects, all that setup is a bit much, especially if you're only looking to Unit Test a small number of API calls.

